Thank you so much, Lee. I hope you can all hear me okay. You might be wondering why it
looks like a horror movie here. I'm currently in Kerala, India, with my family, and there's
been a power cut just a few minutes before coming online, which means weirdly the system
preserves certain things like Wi-Fi but allows other things to die like lights. So I currently
have my phone light beaming in on me, which is why you have this effect. So don't be scared.
Do imagine the best and not the worst for me in this context. We are speaking about imagination
today after all. And it's a great pleasure to invite, well, to welcome you all here first of all,
and this is now the fourth in our series of talks with Ian about the
the matter with things. I get confused with that because I wrote a book once
myself called The Moves that Matter, and every so often the two books kind of flip in my head.
This is about the matter with things, and it's the fourth in our series. And we are particularly
interested tonight to speak about imagination. Our prior event was more about sanity, prior to that
about value, and prior to that matters of Ian's work more generally. Tonight we've arranged the
conversation with Phoebe Tekel, whom I'm very pleased to introduce to you all. Many of you will
know her already. Phoebe is, I'll give the formal definition before the informal one, a biologist,
systems thinker, and founder of moral imaginations. It's an organization driving a movement of
imagination-powered activism, placing life back at the center of the economy, politics, and systems
of governance. Phoebe works across multiple societal contexts, and has advised government,
the education sector, and the food and farming sector. More recently she has worked with Camden
Council to train council officers in the skills of collective imagination and horizontal leadership.
Phoebe will speak a bit more about what all of that means, but I can say that I know her
personally. I was also part of a sort of imagination practice that she did with a large
group of people in Berlin a few years ago. So I have firsthand experience of how she evokes and
elicits sort of imagination in large groups of people for the greater good, and it's a practice
that's continuing to develop and be refined as we go. Phoebe is a scientist by background,
like Ian, they have in common this kind of deep spirit of scientific inquiry leading you
beyond science, which I think all the best scientists somehow on the one hand remain loyal
to science and yet somehow move themselves beyond it as well, and I think they share that at the
very least. I think the way I've seen this conversation in outline is that this is a chance for
Ian who's fascinated by imagination and makes it one of his main pathways to truth
in the matter of things, to speak with someone who's working very seriously and in a very dedicated
way to bring imagination, to walk the talk of imagination in practice in civil society context,
where we say we need greater imagination but don't always know how to go about doing it.
Phoebe's actually taking it very seriously and trying to do that, and for Phoebe it's a chance
to get a richer, more full theoretical take on what exactly imagination is and why,
and I believe they're going to explore many things including moral imagination.
So it's a great pleasure to let them speak to each other, and I can release you from the
terror of this image of me with the light and the darkness. I hope to be back for the Q&A
looking slightly more respectable, but until then I welcome the chance to introduce you to
Phoebe Tekel and Ian McGilchrist, and I hope they'll have a great 50 or so minutes talking
between them, and then we'll speak about how to do the Q&A once it starts then.
Thank you all very much, and I'll see you a bit later. Bye.
Ian, is it just me who thinks Jonathan should probably stick to that kind of
intro in the dark with the light? I think it's a marvellous improvement.
So often a negation proves to be extremely positive.
I agree. What better introduction to a session on imagination?
Indeed, indeed. So yeah, you carry on. No, no, I'd like you to fire away.
Okay, so I mean, I wanted to just start by saying that it's not an exaggeration to say that it's a
huge honour to have this conversation, and just to say a big thank you for your work
on reading the master and his emissary, and also the two huge tones which I've got here on my desk,
the two latest books. Massive. I've been using it as a laptop stand, but also really amazing,
really incredible, but really grateful because as I have been reading your work,
what I have been finding is that there is a resonance to the work that goes beyond just the
content. There's a sort of grammar of meaning, and it kind of reminded me of the conversation
you and Zach were having about how meaning and value are so inherent in the universe,
and I really had this sense as I read your book that there is something resonating in your work
that is much deeper than the left hemispheric kind of, oh, that's an interesting fact, and
oh, that's a great quote, and that's a fantastic bit of research. There is something going on
at a deeper level, which perhaps also has something to do with identity,
because actually as a scientist, as somebody who started life in the sciences and felt
profoundly dissatisfied by the scientific route to truth, and really felt that the
sciences as a whole were just quite impoverished as a way to understand reality. As I'm reading
your books, I'm feeling like you've done me and probably many others a huge favour to give us
a stack of research and backing for what that feeling is, the feeling of this can't be all
there is, there must be more, and I found my way from science, how long ago was it, about
seven years ago I left the lab at Imperial College London, finally said, okay,
I love science, but there's something more, and actually if we want to try and address what's
wrong with the world, clearly science and technology don't have the answers, because we've been trying
that route for the last 200 plus years, so there's something else, and I found my way to
imagination, which is obviously the topic of what we're going to focus on today, and I found it
profoundly encouraging that the final chapter of the first volume of the matter of things is
imagination, it feels like you went on a similar path from questioning science as the only
route, science and reason as the only route to truth, to questioning how are we unmaking the
world through perception, through some kind of divorce from reality, because clearly there's
something going on if we're so out of touch with reality, that we're creating the kind of
destruction that we see today, and I'll stop in a second, but one of the other things I found
profoundly satisfying was that you also came to the same conclusion, that imagination is not
a faculty and a capacity that takes us away from the world, it's actually one that brings us
closer to reality, and I feel like this is what I've been trying to say for the last kind of four
or five years when I started the work with moral imagination, I was saying I think imagination
can get us closer to what really matters and what is real, but I felt like I was sounding like a
crazy person, so that's where I want to start, it's just a big thank you really, and I'm curious
to hear any thoughts you've got in response to that. Oh that's a very kind introduction,
and there were so many things in what you said that I would love to pick up on,
I mean one that just comes to mind is the difficulty of articulating the really important
things, and these are the things that don't therefore get adequate treatment into science
and in the discourse of reason, both of which I honor hugely, as I believe you do too, but I don't
accept that they are the only ways of reaching reality or even necessarily the most profound ones,
but they make a very very valuable contribution, and I worry about the way in which sometimes
nowadays people are too ready to disparage either science or reason, so yes, but essentially
it's going to defeat language, because what we're talking about when we're thinking about
imagination is a resonance between ourselves and another, and that other isn't necessarily
well specified, but it's absolutely real, it may be the existence of a phenomenological world
around us, it may be a realm in which the better ways to talk about ourselves are as
embodied souls, but there is here something that language will always bring to the ground
with a great flood, which is in no way does justice to what it is that we're talking about,
so I do think that imagination is central, and that's why in a way I did work towards that at the
end of part one and that section on epistemology, and you'll notice at the end of part two which is
the metaphysics, I have a chapter on the sense of the sacred, which is also another thing you
know from the very word go, it's going to defeat language, but we mustn't be put off by that,
we must stick to our perceptions, and you can have perceptions and you can have insights
without them necessarily having to be explicit in language, in fact all the best ones are not,
which is why we have poetry, why we have music, why we have ritual, why we have narrative myths,
all these things are able to put us in touch with things that importantly need to remain
implicit unless they're going to be degraded by this the common coin of everyday language,
which makes everything similar to something else that we already know, so what are we going to
do about the realm where we're going to find things that we don't already know, because language
only deals with the stuff that we do, unless it works against itself, and you may know that my
first book was called Against Criticism, I wrote it in my 20s, and well anyway yes, I think it was,
it sold about 400 copies and after that was unceremoniously remained, and Faber made a big
loss on it, but the idea there was to argue there was something wrong with the way in which we
conceived academic criticism, which was to take an entity that was living entirely imaginative,
implicit, embodied, and utterly unique, and turn it into something every day that was
general in nature, decontextualized, disembodied, and from which the the magic of imagination
had disappeared, but there was another meaning to the title, which was that criticism could work
if it worked against criticism, in other words, there is a kind of discourse which is aware of
its own limitations and can incorporate them, there is a kind of science that can be aware
of the limitations and therefore not become hubristic about what it can definitely state,
and it's getting into that area where you've neither rubbish something nor said this is our
saviour, this will give us all the story, there will never be the whole story, because I believe
that whatever it is we're trying to contact is essentially infinite, and also of infinite
importance, which gives us a bit of a thing to think about during our lifetime, because we
have a short period in which to make use of this amazing gift, so that's what I'd say in the outset
anyway, how would you, what would you think about that?
Not there, so a metaphor, a couple of things, so the metaphor that I can't remember where it
is in the book, but where you talk about the flat, maybe it's in a quote, the flashlight
and the the fertile dark, biochemist who is talking about how, you know,
Irwin Charakoff, yes, yes, and I loved that, so he was saying, you know, I think people think
that science is about illuminating the darkness, but actually science needs this fertile darkness,
and if you think that you're illuminating it, it's the kind of flashlight in the void, you know,
in the dark, starry skies and, you know, kind of incredible, mystical, ineffable universe,
and you've got this flashlight and you're saying, well, we found it, it's this room here that we
can see, and I thought that was such a good, such a great metaphor for what we, you know,
what the situation we're in, and then it also made me think about, obviously as an imagination,
activist, you know, person, you know, obsessive, I've read quite a lot of Blake, William Blake.
Ah, wonderful, yes. You know, his work is huge, hugely, not just inspirational, but like your
work, the kind of work where I read his work and I think, ah, like, yes, this is, this is resonating
with what I'm finding in my practice and, you know, in the kind of lab of imagination where
we're trying out practices and working with people and actually seeing some of, you know,
what he's talking about in kind of 1700s, feeling like, yes. And he, I think there's a work of his
art where he paints Newton, and, you know, he's painted Isaac Newton with this, and he's like
staring at this, at this piece of paper, which has got like a beautiful graph on it, and then
there's like the big chaotic, mystical universe around him, but he's just, you know, he's focusing
on this kind of perfect, you know, perfect equations or, you know, some sort of representation of the
world. And so that, that's what comes up for me is that, you know, science is beautiful and elegant,
and that the reason why I chose to study science and I loved it, like I'm sure you did as well.
But we think that we are discovering everything, you know, it's quite often that I hear people
say like, oh, what if we run out of things to discover of the unit, you know,
covered so much. And actually, what if we run out? Wow, what an impoverished reality.
You need imagination to see how little you know. If you don't have any, you think we know it all.
But yes, I'm so glad you brought up Blake, who by the way, you know, we both know that Blake was
a wonderful man, also quite frustrating in some ways. And he did tend to, for his own purposes,
demonize Newton, who, you know, interestingly, was was more fascinated by spiritual inklings
of his than he was in his physics. But it just goes to show that a great mind can,
I believe, encompass both. And many of the great physicists of the last 100 years show that exactly
that they are able to see into the heart of things matter and see in there something
beyond and more profound. And that that brings me back to Blake. And I hope this is a fruitful
connection. I think the quote is, to the man of imagination, nature is imagination itself.
I think I use that at the beginning of the chapter. And what's really interesting about
that, you can puzzle over it. What does he mean, the man of imagination, nature is imagination
itself. But just before it, I quote, Richard Feynman, who says that nature has a far, far
greater imagination than a human being, which is really a way of saying, our puny imagination can
only get so far in investigating what there is. But I think that Blake is making a more profound
point. I mean, it's a very good point, which I entirely agree. But I think what Blake is saying
is that the imagination, you are not inspecting or something over there. But in imagination,
you are already in whatever it is. So that the subject object divide is actually transcended.
So that if you really look into nature, you are already in nature. And this is what
imagination is about. It's about healing the divide, not in some terribly weird and new edgy way,
which means we can stop thinking. But there is something desperately profound in this idea
that in the realm of imagination, we are actually contacting not a representation,
which is what the left hemisphere offers us, not a drawing, a picture, a graph, a theory,
but the actual experience of what it is in which we finally see sort of through it, but not in the
sense of seeing through it to something that's separate from it beyond, but seeing through
the veil of familiarity to its real core. So I think that that's one thing I'd like to say
about imagination is that it brings us to this place. We're not sort of just making stuff up or
we're definitely not making stuff up. In fact, that's the exact opposite of what we're doing.
We're respectfully, honorably, humbly, with awe, approaching whatever it is, and thereby
allowing ourselves for once to get close to it and into it.
I'm so glad you said that. During the work of finding the thread of imagination and kind of
pulling on it and starting to unravel a huge amount, what I've been uncovering in my research
and thinking and writing and practice is that imagination, I think, is one of the most deeply
misunderstood things, not non-things, actually, because I think one of the reasons it's been
is because it's been so thingified. It's been so, you know, it's like, oh, the imagination,
the thing that is over there that we do sometimes on the weekend and we have it when we are
children, but we don't have it when we're out, you know, and it's this ridiculous kind of,
even the language we use around imagination is completely, it's not just inaccurate, but it
leads us into completely confused realms and creates quite an odd relationship between
ourselves and imagination. And this has been a lot of the work of the last few years is like,
actually, before I even get to do the work of actually, you know, testing and experimenting
with how can we increase, you know, increase imagination capacity, which is also a bit of a
an odd term. Because actually, what I've been finding is that there's no need to,
there's nothing to increase, because it's not a volume or a thing, there is just unblocking
to be done from the relationship to it. Yeah, I mean, I can keep going.
We'll do.
I mean, I wish this was like a four hour conversation, because it's so good to unpack some of this.
What I just wanted to comment about it there, since we've had a little hiatus is the idea that
imagination is not something that has somehow to be drummed up. It's something that is there
all the time, if a certain way of thinking doesn't get between us and it. So we use and have to use
the left hemisphere as mode of apprehension in order to be able to function properly. But as I'm
always saying, there's nothing wrong with that. There's something good about that. As long as we
can then remember to go beyond it, to have finished that process of unpacking explicitly,
and then say, right, it's none of that, although that has actually helped us on the way. So it's
as people say in so many religious traditions, that the seeking of God is not that God is hiding
somewhere, but God is there if only you don't stop yourself from seeing. And that could be said,
I think, about the imagination that it is there. And it's by not doing things and by not
espousing certain views and not acting and so on, but allowing, permitting something that it will
come into being for us. Exactly. And one of the things that the participants of, you know, the
programs that we're running with moral imagination say is that one of the most valuable things that
we're doing when we go into local councils is giving them planned unplanned time. And to start
with, the kind of managers were like, what do you need unplanned time? But that's actually what
it takes is to just, you know, how can we expect exercise imagination when there's no space or
time and we're completely flooded by the need to deliver, to produce, to perform
worst conditions for imagination. Modern day. And those are all expressions of the left
hemispheric mentality that we must have something we can measure. There must always be a utility,
there must be a product to this. Otherwise, this has been completely wasted, even if the time that
you spent was profoundly useful, but didn't actually turn up anything measurable at the time.
So it's all this administration managerial thinking that, in my view, is mushrooming in the
world. I mean, so fast that I think there's a very palpable difference between now and five years
ago. I mean, it was bad all the time I was growing up. I complained about it in the 70s and the 80s,
but I hadn't seen anything till you get to 2023. And I think this is partly to do with machines,
which of course, have no imagination, have no understanding of context, individuality,
embodiedness, feeling, the spiritual, anything. But our following simple left hemisphere rules say
it's much worse. It's much worse than talking to an administrator is having to deal with a machine.
And now most of the time when you want to do anything, you have to interface with the machine.
So that is the death of imagination. And I'm sure you know, Paul Kingsmorth uses the term
the machine as I think it's a perfectly good way of talking about what I mean by the left
hemisphere. All I'd say is that it's bigger than the machine in the machine is an expression of
this left hemisphere mentality. But the left hemisphere mentality is behind the machine and
behind many other things. So for example, we we look at various predicaments, the obviously the
destruction of the planet, the the catastrophic changes in climate, all of these things. And we
see them as something either bad luck or bad planning or something we did wrong. And we look
at other things like the growing disparity, not the diminishing disparity between the
unimaginably rich and the poor. And we think we must have got a problem here. And what did we do?
And there's all these different problems. What was the solution? And the answer is,
they're not problems, but in dual hinds terms, their predicaments that we have brought about
by a certain way of thinking, which leads inexorably to each of these, and to a de spiritualized,
desacralized sense of the world in which we live.
Yes. So, so I'm just holding in mind, you know, there's a couple of things I'd
like to cover in this conversation. So I'm just following the thread of where it's going. But
I will pull us into a couple of things. I'd really like to say, I'd love to spend some time on the
brain and imagination neuroscience, because that's something that, you know, I've done a lot of
thinking and research around. And and would love to talk to you about, you know, linking it with
the right, right and left hemisphere, and also talking about moral imagination, which was my
way into imagination. We must talk about both of those. Yes. Yes. I didn't just want to have,
you know, hat tip to chat GPT, because you mentioned, you know, machines don't have imagination,
and I'm sure that it's on everybody's mind is, you know, right now, there is a lot of talk about
how chat GPT seems to have imagination, you know, it's, it's kind of churning out poems and
rap battles and, you know, it seems to be creative, even though it's, you know, through a mimicry of
all the information, you know, kind of emergent property of all the information it's gathering
and kind of faring off. But, you know, do you want to say anything about? Oh, gosh, I do. Yes.
Because, I mean, I want to say that I can't intellectually completely rule out that at some
point, some creation of ours might might achieve a kind of consciousness. I just can't rule that
out, partly because I believe the consciousness is the original primary stuff of the cosmos,
in any case. But what you mean there, and what I mean by imagination is not what this is doing,
what it is doing is exactly what an imaginary person doesn't do, which is do a very quick,
which of course the human being couldn't do in this speed, what machines do is just do things
very fast, is to sort of do a trolley dash around Wikipedia and come up with an answer.
And it will even make stuff up and be quite sure that it's right because it sees a pattern and jumps
to conclusions, which is what the left hemisphere does. And really, this is no different from
something that existed decades ago. I can't remember the name of the man, but basically what he did was
he fed all of Bach's works into a computer, and then set some sort of, you know, let the
computer look at these things and then imitate a work of Bach. But none of these works has anything
like the power of Bach, and Bach's very first composition when he was 19 years old is already
one of the most staggering pieces of musical writing in history, and it wasn't derived from
anywhere. So we're looking at things that we must be careful, you know, because a machine
can be made by human ingenuity to simulate almost anything. I mean, there's no limit to how far you
can help it simulate. The question is, is it simulating something, or is it actually achieving
it? And so far, there's no evidence that it's achieving it. Is there also something about,
you know, it's almost like a left hemisphere response to art or to the sacred. It's like,
oh, but, you know, we could just churn out, you know, does the sacredness of art
become affected if it's something that's being churned out through random, you know, re-organization
of, you know, fact and existing art? I mean, that, I think we could talk for the whole hour
just about this, but I did just, you know, to touch on it. It's relevant. Well, really, it's
really the logical conclusion of the Industrial Revolution, which was to take things that took
a lot of craftsmanship and were, you know, occurred in nature, and try and imitate them,
and then produce thousands of them very, very fast. It's exactly what was going on already in the
early part of the 19th century. It's just been heightened to another level of technological
sophistication. But it's not going to produce, it's never going to produce works that have profound
human meaning, because you have to have a body, emotions, the sense of relationship, the knowledge
that you're going to die, to have suffered, and to be aware of the limitations to what it is that
you can experience. And I just think this is, this can be fed by a clever IT expert into a
computer. It seems to say those things, but it can't actually do them.
So back to, imagine it, the organic. I said at the beginning that I felt it was one of the most
deeply misunderstood, and we, without the signifying of imagination, you know, I also,
in your chapter 19 of your book, you talk about how, I guess the parallel is that
many people, when they think of imagination, think of fantasy, think of daydreaming. And this
is often what I get when I talk to people about what I do. It's like, oh yeah, you know, we need
more imagination, we need more fiction, you know, we need more creativity. Another big misconception
I've been fighting is that people think that my work is all about the future. It's not about
the future. It's about, it's not about time. In fact, I actually think in the imaginative,
imaginal realm, there is no time. It's not a time bound place. And so that's been quite an
interesting thing to unpack is that people immediately think that what I'm doing is helping
people imagine the future. When actually, the work of moral imaginations is really about shifting
perspective and unblocking and seeing what is there. So it's not, we're not trying to get people
to think about the future. You're about, were you about to come in there? It's very interesting,
because I mean, you know that you sent me some things to look at about an hour before this,
and I therefore didn't have time to look at them in any depth. But I was interested by your three
pillars, which would seem on the face of it, to suggest that you are interested in the past
and the future, as well as our relationships with the natural world. I like that actually,
because I think that one thing we've lost is the sense that we are, it's part of our atomistic way
of thinking. We are part of a flow which includes the past and includes the future. And our ancestors
and any of our offspring are already present in our lives in some way. And we owe them each
a moral obligation. We have a moral obligation to those who worked hard, sacrificed, died to
produce the things that we take for granted, and all the wisdom that they stored up, which is now
just being trashed and thrown out of the window. And we have a moral obligation, a very big one,
to those that come after us, not to carry on defiling and destroying what is their birthright.
So I like that. But maybe what you're saying is that in the realm of imagination,
there is no time. I wouldn't know really whether that was or not. But I think that
when you're really in the realm of imagination, you're not aware of time. You're not aware of
time passing. So that when you make contact after all, imagination is not only not a thing.
It's a relationship. And that relationship is reverberative. So something is going on that
is bringing something into being. And this is why you have to do the kind of one foot in
either camp of saying, it's not just something I make up, but it's not something just out there
given. It's something that comes into being that is utterly real. An aspect of what it is is revealed
in the relationship with my imagination. And so we're dealing there with something that it is
the only hope we have of getting into reality. Because if you just look at Wordsworth and
Coleridge, I have the greatest philosophical writers on imagination in any language, I believe.
But I mean, what they were saying is that when we think we see something, we look at the mountain
and we just see a lump of rock and so on. But it's only when we use our imagination that we
see into it. And in doing so, we don't see something that's other than a lump of rock.
We see what a lump of rock is that lump of rock is by the way, not any that lump of rock is for
the first time. And this reminds me of the Zen master Dogen in the 12th century, who said,
when I sought enlightenment, the mountains were just mountains and the rivers were just rivers.
When I was in the process of seeking enlightenment, the mountains were no longer mountains, the rivers
were no longer rivers. When I achieved enlightenment, the mountains were mountains and the rivers were
rivers. And I think that's the point is we're not putting something in place of something.
We're allowing the real entity for the first time to become real in this world. And we each
to blink to moral imagination. The reason I believe that attention is moral is because the way we
attend changes of what it is we find. And what we find is part of the imaginative world that is the
only thing that is real. And so we are actually creating something, either something terrible
or something good by what we do. And that means that we each bear the burden of a certain kind of
responsibility for what we do. Lake talks about twofold vision, which I think is very relevant
here. And I love the, you know, his couplets of, Oh, God, may, may us keep from single vision,
Newton's sleep. And, you know, I love what he talked about was actually the view of the world
is just material. That's Newton's sleep, you know, falling you into a sleep away from reality,
which you actually feel through twofold vision, meaning one eye and, you know,
looking and seeing what is, but the other eye, having this internal mind's eye of
imagination, and that is the twofold vision of what is real. And we've been lulled into a sleep,
you know, by, I, he clearly has an issue in Newton, but he also depicts Newton as like a
beautiful, healthy guy. So I don't think it was only that, but for Newton, it's not only him.
And as you say, he also had a great interest in the mystical and the mysterious.
Yes. I loved that, that kind of, you know, this is lulling us into a dangerous sleep,
which we might not wake up from before it's too late. And that's why this work is so urgent and so
existential, actually, because actually we're asleep at the wheel, and we're heading towards a
cliff. And I completely agree. Yeah. And I did, but imagination can, can wake us up.
It needs to, because as I, as I say in one of the books, I don't know, that we're like
some nambulist wandering towards the abyss, humming a happy tune as we go. And that's the
left hemisphere. It doesn't see what's happening. And yet it thinks all is fine, because I know,
and I'm in control. So we need to see, I think Blake also said that, you know,
that the man of imagination sees not with the eye, but through the eye. And again,
it gives this idea of a depth to what one's seeing. But that what one shouldn't think is that what
one sees through the eye is some hidden reality behind what it is. One sees into the depths of
things, as Wordsworth said. This is a very, very important idea that he, in fact, he talks about
lulling our intellectual, Wordsworth talks about in the Tentanabula, about
lulling our intellectual faculties asleep, so that the, that we can see into the depths of things.
So there's a kind of sleep of reason, which is either what Goya thought was terrible,
and I know what he was talking about, because it's happening in our own time, when people
just decide that they're going to dispense with reason, because it doesn't accord with what they
want to believe. So they'll just believe it anyway. And so there is a sleep of reason,
but there's sometimes a need to silence the hemisphere that does all the processing of
language, so that the other hemisphere, the right hemisphere, can for once see the whole.
Which is actually what happens during sleep, you know, and which gives rise to dreams,
isn't it, that the kind of dominant, I've been, you know, my research has led me to the default
mode network, which I don't know if that is left hemispheric, you know, dominant network,
because it's, it seems to be the seat of rationality, reason, also the sense of self,
we don't, you know, when we're born, we don't have a default mode network. So as babies,
we don't have memories, because the default mode network is what gives us that autobiographical
sense of self. But it's also, it's also what constrains the imagination. So as children,
we have imaginary friends, and those imaginary friends are not close our eyes and somewhere
over there, they're here with us, that, you know, people see children talking to their imaginary
friend, because it's there. And so, you know, interesting that the default mode network becomes
stronger and stronger, you know, into adulthood. And I think it was either Blake or somebody writing
about Blake talked about how compared adulthood to the falling out of Eden, you know, the kind
of innocent childlike wonder and awe and imagination that we have. And then as we're older, there's a
kind of divorce from that and the strengthening of these networks and also our culture and society
that is constantly strengthening the neural pathways, you know, of reason of rationality,
of modeling, predicting, controlling. And it's interesting that often when people go through
our workshops, they talk about rekindling or reconnecting with a kind of inner sense of childlike
wonder, or you know, someone's even said like, I feel like I've discovered the five year old,
you know, that was kind of inside me, which sounds a bit contrived or, you know, a bit silly, but
there's something interesting going on, that people are finding a reconnection to a childlike
that which which has a huge pain, you know, that they feel a great sense of grief that that's been
lost. And this is all connected, you know, that your work of the kind of dominant rationality
reason. Anyway, that's a jumble of thoughts. No, no. Yes. As that. Well, no. Of course, there are
different kinds of imagination. There's the imagination of a Michelangelo or Bach, and there's
the imagination of a thoughtful, lively five year old. And there's a, in a way, there's a sort of
parallel to the way in which there is a kind of knowing, which gets in the way of unknowing.
It's not the same as the unknowing you have when you're ignorant and still have to learn.
It's the unknowing that, in fact, goes beyond knowing when you know enough to know that you have
to practice unknowing. Similarly, there's a kind of innocence a child has, which is, as it were,
a gift that they have. But there is a kind of innocence that a saint has that comes the other
side of experience and is greater than either the innocence or experience. And so I would say that
there is a kind of sense of imagination. The imagination can grow. It doesn't have to be
stunted by life. But the processes whereby we educate people can certainly contribute to a
process of, you know, making them feel small and making them feel silly if they confess to
imaginative ideas, such as, you know, an imaginative friend and then somebody says,
now, don't be so silly. There isn't really anyone there. And of course, this links to bigger
topics like amongst other people, poor old Dawkins, he's become like Newton for Blake,
but he just keeps on saying these things. He sort of believes it's terrible.
He's his own worst foe. How dare people indoctrinate children into these ideas of a spiritual realm
with a divine realm as well. They never think of this if they weren't indoctrinated into it.
But actually, there's a lot of research, some of which I quote in that book,
which shows that children naturally are aware of things beyond what we call the realm of the
five senses. But this is kind of drummed out of them by being told it's wrong and humiliating them.
And then they go, oh, well, and they're lucky if they can then reconnect with it. And of course,
in my experience, certainly helps to reconnect one with that is the greatness of art in all its
various forms and the experience of what everyone likes to call it religious or spiritual life.
And nature. And nature is core to all of this. Yes, absolutely. Yes.
So into moral imagination, because I did this is really,
you know, I find imagination is absolutely fascinating. And it's, to me, it's, you know,
the most convincing route towards getting us out of this mess, you know,
existential crisis as many people do in their 20s and really felt like, you know,
what are we doing to the world? And that crisis has essentially led me to imagination. But
through that crisis, you know, the question I was really asking was like,
how is it that we're making such immoral decisions? How is it that we are making decisions that
are so self-serving, so greedy? You know, what is that about? How does that come about? So I became
really fascinated by morality and ethics, you know, and thinking probably with a hangover of my
scientific, you know, brain thinking like, okay, so the problem is a lack of morality or, you know,
a lack of the sacred or some sort of death of what is good, beautiful and true. So how,
what can we do about that? Started reading about morality and didn't find a lot of it very interesting.
And then came across, you know, came across, you know, the thing I was thinking about was that
actually, the way that we've approached morality in the West has a lot of parallels to the way
that we approached, you know, science, that it's very much tangled up in reason, in rationality and,
you know, the kind of enlightenment breeds of morality like utilitarianism or Kantianism
feel like they're very much left brain schools of morality and thought and, you know, Kantianism
suffers from extreme abstract, you know, abstraction, utilitarianism suffers from extreme reductionism.
And so I started wondering what would morality with a kind of upswell of imagination, like,
where could those two things come together? And I think it's interesting that a lot of Western
morality is based on, you know, this is a very simple model that Mark Johnson talks about,
the kind of moral, moral folklore. So a very basic model of the mind having, you know, four
components, you could think of it as perception, will, you know, the mental realm, it's got,
let's say it's got for these four members, perception, reason, passion and will. And the way
this works is, you know, perception receives sense impressions from the body, passes them to reason
or passion. And these two things affect our will. And passions become active through bodily experience,
you know, either directly through perception or through memory. Reason receives this information
and calculates and analyzes sense data and passes it to the will. And, you know, basically it's up
to the will to decide how to act based on these two influences. And so, you know, as I said,
reason calculates, passion exerts force on the will. And we think of passion as kind of unpredictable,
difficult to control. Reason, you know, exerts force on the will, but the will can sometimes
resist reason. It can't resist, you know, it can sometimes resist the force of passion. So
there's something here about, you know, that the model of morality being the ability to use reason
to make the right decision and to resist the force of passion. And we also think of animals as
lacking reason. And so humans being these, you know, like a reason, a rational animal or a reasonable
animal. But the role of imagination doesn't play any role here at all. And to be a moral
to be moral in this folk model of morality is to exert reason and is to resist the force of
passion. Are you, are you with me on this? Or, you know, is there anything to
No, I am. I am broadly with you. What I'm thinking, though, here is that, as you're well aware,
there are different schools of thought about morality and very different approaches to religion
and the religious life. And like everything else, the left hemisphere and the right hemisphere have
different takes on them. And what you're pointing to is what joins together all these various things,
the excesses of capitalism, of rationalism, of mechanism and so on, is that these are
expressions of the will for power, which is essentially the only value, as I've said before
on previous occasions, the only value that really drives the left hemisphere, it's evolved to be
the one that manipulates. And that leaves all the other values that are to you and me and I think
to all human beings, so important and so neglected, it leaves them out of the picture and out of the
calculation. And I would say that, you know, for all that was a bit autistic and hyper-rationalistic
in some ways, and he did say, you know, the two things that film you with awe, the starry vault
above me and the moral law within me. So, I mean, he was in awe of the fact that there was a morality
at all. And indeed, he thought that there must be a God because there was morality. He didn't
think there must be morality because there was a God. So, he thought that this moral thing was
actually very important and intuitive, although his particular approach to it I slightly differ
from. But one of the things that one now sees in the way we talk about morality is exactly what
you were getting at, that it seems to be about a logical process that will result in the utility
and maximise utility. And I don't want to recap on this because I think I talked about it probably
did. Yeah, I think you covered it with that conversation.
Exactly. But there is a huge problem with this approach and that what it rules out as you also
were hinting is the depth and importance of our intuitive imagination, which helps us to be human.
And I think we're just becoming less than human because of the assault on all sides,
on intuition and imagination and the substitution of an incredibly mediocre thing,
which is a rationalising system. And I'm not saying that there is no virtue in having such a
way of thinking at certain stages in any kind of process. You need it. I keep reiterating that
because I don't want to fall into this thing. People think, oh yeah, the right hemisphere is
all creative and wonderful and the left hemisphere is this bogeyman. The left hemisphere is very,
very useful, but it doesn't know its own limitations. And that is the problem we now find ourselves in.
So in a way, I feel rather like I've just read actually in very much admire
Dougalde Hein's latest book. He just came and visited on the day that it came out a week or two ago.
And we were in conversation the week after, Dougalde and I. Wonderful. And I don't have much time
these days for reading, but I started reading and thought I think I'm going to have to finish
and I thought it was brilliant. But really what he's saying is very much this thing that it's just
aren't a wicked network of this problem and that problem and the other problem,
but there is a whole way of thinking that underlies very clearly the whole package.
And it's no good just addressing it at the top level. That would be like putting a sticking
plaster on a cancer. You've covered it, but it's going to keep growing. What we have to do
is to emphasize that the only way out of this is to rethink our moral stance. And what I mean by
that is to embrace above all a degree of humility about what it is that we as humans can do to
therefore listen to the wisdom that comes through silence and through traditions and through art
and through nature, if you attend to it, and to express compassion and moderation in the way in
which we try to deal with these. I don't mean moderation in the sense of averaging everything
out, but I mean not supposing that this one thing, if we just do this, we'll answer everything and
being extreme about it. We have to know that there are people who have differing angles on this and
they can contribute something. And so what the work you're doing, which is to liberate people's
imaginations from whatever it is that they're constantly being told they have to believe,
is wonderful because it will bring different facets of truth to life.
Thank you. I mean a really important part of the work is also the connection to what matters,
this moral imagination. The way I see that is that rather than following moral laws and rules that
can actually be massively manipulated, religion can be wonderful. It can also be very harmful.
Absolutely. Looking to kind of top down morality and morality has become a really dirty word,
but a lot of people have raised their eyebrows at the name of moral imaginations and what we're
doing. And yet we're trying to reclaim that and say actually what we need, what everybody needs is
to kind of build a muscle of moral imagination and metaphor and the ability to really connect with
what you know matters and is beautiful and good and true and not wait to be told that or to follow
rules or to try and work out what the right law or rule or principle is, but to get this kind of
coming alive through the imagination, through the kind of faculties that we're talking about,
the kind of right hemispheric, intuitive, imaginative capacities to develop that compass
of what is right and wrong and what are we not going to let happen. Does that make sense?
There's a kind of what I'm trying to do is knit them together. I love that. I love that. And I
think you ought to wear the superciliousness of these people who raise an eyebrow and you
talk about morality as a badge of pride. It shows that you're really onto something important
because nowadays everything that's really important is being attacked and destroyed because it
demands of some degree of self-restraint. It demands that we are aware of the limitations
and boundaries in things. We can't just have everything we want and have it now. We need,
actually, to exercise some virtuous restraint on how we behave and how we think. And without it,
we're utterly lost. And it comes from an intuitive level. What really interests me is that there's
a couple of cases I refer to in the book in which scientists who are completely convinced, of course,
that human beings are naturally... Competitive, self-interested... Competitive and self-interested,
egotistical and so on. It's set up experiments to show this and, we're honest enough, report
that the answer showed the exact opposite. That people aren't normally naturally... And you see
this in children. We didn't have to be tortured unless there's something very wrong with them,
I know. But generally speaking, you see this, that they love to help one another. They love to be
cooperative. We are naturally generous and it's further thinking and ratiosination that leads us
to be greedy and self-seeking and speak for our own interests rather than others. So,
you know, once again, it's a case of there not being a predicament. How on earth do we reverse
the way we are? However, do we... It's actually there. It's all there ready. If you can just tear
down the edifice that's been built in front of it, if you see what I mean.
Completely. And the systemic, you know, we haven't really talked much about, you know, the systemic
forces that keep us and, you know, that really encouraged the kind of qualities you're talking
about. Let's do so. Capitalism. Capitalism. You know, what do you... I didn't see capitalism
mentioned so much explicitly in your book, but I'd be really curious to hear, you know, where
the place for the kind of systemic critique of where we find ourselves is.
Well, I suppose the thing about capitalism is that, in a word, it's a product of the left
hemisphere. It's... However, people will say, well, what would you like to put in its place?
And I certainly wouldn't want to put communism in its place. But there are other alternatives
we could talk about based on... It would take that to reach a kind of more
communitarian way of living would require probably some disaster, I hope doesn't occur,
but which would sufficiently disrupt the structures we have now and people would be
thrown back on having to help one another, trust one another, work together and so on.
Because at the moment, we've become lazy. So go back to capitalism. I think that
there are ways of thinking of capitalism in which it's tempered by other things. And so
anything that is dogmatic is going to be inhuman and damaging. And so whatever system you come
up with, it needs to be tempered. It needs to be qualified. Whatever it is, it's going to have to
have those... That's not wrong. That's just showing that you're taking into account
various different things. I don't talk about it largely because I'm not myself, particularly
involved in political thinking. And I don't want to... I'm more interested in the things
behind politics than in the politics themselves. So I didn't want to start a big conversation
about that, which would have been a whole other book, one which I'm absolutely not equipped to
write. So yeah. It is an interesting question. What could imagining to imagine what is a right
hemispheric system? If capitalism is created by the left hemisphere, what... And I thought
this quite often as I've read your work is we live in a society dominated by the left hemisphere
in doctrine. And it's too far and it needs to swing back. But what would a society look like
if it had... If it was kind of swung too far the other way, just to...
Yes. I mean, if it swung too far the other way, I'm often asked, so what would a right
hemisphere society look like? And I say, well, very moderate, because the thing about the right
hemisphere is that it understands the need for the left hemisphere's contribution. And in the
story of the master and the emissary, the master pointed the emissary. It's just the emissary now
thinks it's the master. That's the problem. So there isn't really... Sorry, what are we talking
about there? The right hemispheric system. What would that look like? Oh, yes, what would it look
like? Yes, yes. And we have had periods in history, I think, where they're not what we would probably
suggest to ourselves now, but we're obviously massively creative periods in which society flourished
in the West. But they were fairly short lived. And the thing is that every civilization is fairly
short lived. And I can't remember the name of the guy now, but early 20th century writer who looked
30 past civilizations and reckoned that, I mean, of course, it's not scientific to say when does
it begin and when does it end. But a reasonable gestalt was that they tended to come up and then
fade over about three to 400 years, that seems to be the normal pattern. And one way of thinking
about that is in the terms of William Orffles. I can never remember whether he's William or Patrick.
One, this is real name, the other is pseudonym. Not a good pseudonym. Orffles, O-P-H-U-L-S, who wrote
Immodern Greatness, which is a quote from Gibbon. But effectively, it's a very short book, only 80
pages long. All of you go out and buy it after this, it doesn't cost anything, or much. And he gives
the six reasons why civilizations always undermine themselves by overreaching themselves in various
ways. And one way of thinking of that is that this self-satisfying thing of the left hemisphere
takes over. But one fairly, I think we would all resonate with this, one image he has, is that
civilizations tend to go through phases. In the first phase, they require enormous levels of
mutual trust, valor, self-sacrifice, courage, hard work, you know, honor, then building something
valuable. And then when that's been built, I think where the next wave comes along, and they can build
on top of that, and they produce works of science, they produce great works of art, they elaborate
on top of this. And then the next wave, which is the final wave comes along, where they are basically
now soft, weak, selfish, lack self-discipline, think that they're entitled to everything
on a plate because they're born. And I believe this is the one we're ridden now. We believe that
somehow it's our right to carry on living in a totally absurd way, which is destroying
everything we value. Thank you for answering that. And I know it seems as if we diverged
from imagination, but I think a lot of what really brings people's imaginations alive at the
moment is the question of what could an alternative look like, and also the unimaginable. That brings
me a lot of hope, actually. The idea that all big social change, all societal change was always
unimaginable before it happened, and the 50 years of the world we're living in now was completely
unimaginable. And so when people say there is an air of hopelessness and despair and
a darkness around what's coming next, there is a cliff edge. There is, there is. I find it very
encouraging to hear you gesture at the unimaginable alternative. One of the points that maybe we need
to start winding up our bit and hand over, but one of the things in in Dougal's book
is this idea that the reason we're so despairing about what's coming is that we think too narrowly
about ourselves. And we and the life that we are living now probably won't exist in the future.
And it didn't exist in the past either. But some creatures will live with any luck. I imagine
substantial numbers of human beings will live and the world will begin to heal and regenerate.
And what I hope is that those human beings will be, will have their eyes opened to things that
we're now blinded to by being too comfortable and too convinced that we know it all. And that
that will lead them to a kind, humane, courageous working together in which people are bound together
by the ties that really make life worth living. And it will be in smaller communities than the
ones we have now. And it's not a human faculty to be able to understand very large numbers,
and especially not very large numbers of people. Is it three million or is it three billion or
three trillion? We just don't know. But you know, we're, we're, we're famously fitted to
knowing about 150 people. That makes sense. And so I think one of the problems is we've simply
agglomerated everything. And that's been partly due to technology and partly due to capitalism.
Anyway, maybe that's where we, is that where we begin to, we'd like to have another one of these.
Great. I hope it's just the first. Thank you.
So thank you very much Phoebe.
Thank you. Thank you both Phoebe and Ian. That was really, really interesting. And I thoroughly
enjoyed the whole arc of the conversation. So I'm looking forward to hearing the various
questions that will be coming through shortly. And I should say that Jonathan has encountered
further difficulties with the power where he is. So I'll be conveying the questions and,
and moderating this next part. So I'm actually going to start by asking the question that
Jonathan had hoped to ask if he were able to do it out loud. So I'm just going to read that out
for you. And you have to imagine Jonathan's Scottish accent, which I unfortunately am not
capable of reproducing. And nor would you want me to. So Jonathan wrote, and he put this in the
chat as well. You'll have to scroll up a bit to see it. Ian often suggests that the left
atmosphere is power seeking in some sense. And both Phoebe and Ian suggest imagination may be
critical to wake ourselves up to our predicament and be some part of the solution. And yet power,
in some shape or form, will always be part of reality. So what then can we say about the
relationship between imagination and power? And in particular, what might it mean to imagine
power as something wisely wielded in a way that does not sound naive or wishful thinking? So I
think it's actually quite good as a follow up to the kind of systemic discussion that you were just
having at the end. Yes. So either of you would like to. Do you want to go first, Ian?
Okay. Before saying anything, I see a number of people want to know about Duke Gould Hein's book.
It's called At Work in the Ruins. And it has a very long subtitle, which is so long, it's almost
comical, and I can't remember it. Power. You see, there's a paradox that the more we seek power,
the less we really have any control or influence over what happens. Things control us.
The power-seeking mentality is always frustrated, always unhappy, always unfulfilled. And one sees
this, I have seen it as a psychiatrist very often, but one sees it if one looks around. There is,
and this is often said by people in particularly Eastern traditions, that what we're talking about
is not a kind of helplessness, but a kind of affirming acknowledgement of one's vulnerability,
of the fact that there are limitations, and that in all humility, and honesty, and with
awe, one puts oneself open to something bigger than oneself. And that in doing that,
one finds a new direction, one finds that one is no longer frustrating oneself,
one finds a freedom and autonomy, that by seeking freedom and autonomy in that aggressive left
hemisphere way, we just destroy it. I mean, there never has been a period in the West when freedom
has been more in jeopardy than it is now. And this one says, well, what about the Soviet era
and the Nazi era? But we're going back into one of these areas right now because of a strident,
un-nuanced, naive view about freedom and those sort of things. So that's what I'd say is that I
don't think power is this simple thing about controlling others. It's about letting go of
control in order to be filled with a spiritual sense of things, to be one with the world, and
therefore to be empowered by it. I mean, it is an empowering experience, I can say from my own
poor experience that I find it such. Yeah, thank you for that, Ian. I think what I was struck by
is that I worry that we thingify power, like we thingify imagination. And power is not a thing
that we're trying to get and grab and achieve. There's no end to it. As you say, Ian, it's a
kind of bottomless pit that you can never really reach the end of it. I also, another thing that
comes to mind is that I think the systems thinking, which I think is very right hemisphere,
the kind of systems thinking view on power is not like the physics kind of cause and effect,
like I push the world, I push someone and they fall, that kind of mechanistic view on the world
of power. So that kind of model would mean if the way power is exerted is through kind of pushing
on the world and things happening, then the way to kind of get power is to barricade yourself from
being pushed and to kind of get more and more powerful. But actually, we know through systems
thinking through looking at how nature works, that it doesn't work like that. It's not the
only way it works. Power can also be not zero sum, there can be win-win, there can be different
kinds of power where you win and I win. And everything there's a kind of mutual flourishing
or a different kind of power that doesn't need to mean that other people get pushed down. We could
all be powerful. So I wonder if that's a different kind of power. I love that and I can't resist coming
back to it. Thank you very much because the thing about a complex system and all living things
and all living communities and environments are complex is that they don't have this
efficient causation at the back of them that pushes things forward. Instead, there is
as much bottom down as top up causation, if you'd like to think of it in those ways,
but there are also different kinds of causes. We've selected one of Aristotle's four causes,
the efficient cause, and think that is what causation is. But in fact, people's behavior
is caused also by aspirations towards certain things, by being drawn effortlessly towards
something that is good, beautiful and true, what he called a final cause. And there are also formal
causes which are becoming important in both biology and physics. Where is the information about form
in that DNA code? Actually, there must be form fields, as physics suggests,
so in biology. And this is now entering into the mainstream. It was a bit fringe, but it's now
entering into the mainstream. So there are other ways of thinking about how things are caused,
which are in the round and are beautiful and attractive, not being pushed from behind.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, beautiful. Botanical power. Botanical power, I like it.
All right, well, let's ask Stuart Campbell to ask the next question. So Stuart, if you can,
I will ask you, unmute you here, and if you can ask your question out loud, please.
Yeah, thanks, Lee. So I have a bit of a concern with the term imagination or idea of imagination,
as it's kind of commonly conceived, and that is that human beings can imagine quite wildly and
quite disconnectedly from reality. So my interest is in getting a clear sense of how you discern
imagination and maybe as differentiated from what. In other words, how do we temper imagination or
have imagination relate fittingly to reality? I mean, we could say that the left hemisphere
imagines itself the master. So if you get the tension that I'm trying to speak to here,
I'd love to hear what you have to say. I certainly do see what Stuart's talking about.
And of course, imagination is not just some kind of faulty thinking. And I'm tempted to refer to
the saying by their fruits, you shall know them, that in a way, you know imagination when you
experience it, and you know when you find it in others, that it is not a fantasy of theirs.
Imagination can include dark things, but its general trend is towards life and vivification,
whereas the appropriation of masterhood by the left hemisphere is a kind of blow for death,
if you like, for mechanism. So there isn't, of course, unfortunately, a way we can
measure in any sense imagination. And of course, we can't image it on a on a on a
wretched PET scan or anything like that. We're talking about something which is profoundly
and only experiential. And so imagination can lead people astray. This is right. But I think
it's rather like being in the groove that you know when your imagination is taking you somewhere
good. If you have ever had, which I only very occasionally have had the experience of really
writing a poem rather than just versifying, you kind of know when something is happening through
you. And I think that imagination is like that. It's rather like playing music while singing,
while dancing. Well, that's the best I can say it's completely won't stand up in a court of law,
but it's the best I can do. Help me out, Phoebe. I'm sure you've got something better to say.
Well, I've got an easy out, which is moral imagination, obviously, because it, you know,
what I like to say is that, you know, imagination gave rise to nuclear weapons, you know,
imagination is not, it's not, but it's not necessarily positive. But I resonate with what
you're saying, Ian, which is that there is, you know, we're talking about a kind of
opening the doors of perception and allowing the sacred to flow through.
Exactly. Imagination being the kind of seeing through and allowing, you know,
that real sense of connection to the world or experience of reality. Whereas what I think,
Stuart, you were talking about is more kind of almost like active imagination, actively imagining
things and can obviously lead to bad things and good things and a kind of directed
imagination. I don't think that stands up in a court of law either. But I think it's a good
question. I think there's also something about not being just a head, you know, head based thing.
It's also heart. It's also embodied and it's throughout. And how do we bring alive that
imagination that, you know, that is not just using the neurons of the head, but the neurons of the
gut and the heart and there's so much more there. I hope that. Yeah, I love that. Yeah.
And I think also, well, maybe we've had enough on this question, but, you know,
when people want to be imaginative, and I'm sure this is nothing to do with anything you do,
but, you know, they say, come on, let's have a brainstorming session, you know, and my
bet noir is the brainstorming session. Doesn't matter how crazy it is, we put it on the board and
so on and let it all hang out. This is not actually how creativity works. And I make a big
distinction. I have a whole chapter separate to the imagination of creativity, because I'm talking
really about how the brain can be helped in this. And it is nothing to do with this
and simply letting it all hang out. That is not likely to end up with anything very useful.
And when you look at people who are truly creative, they operate in a completely different way from
the person who is trying to be creative. If you're not creative, then don't worry,
you're not a creative person for now. Maybe later, you will be. But right now, you're not a creative
person, but don't try to be creative because it's counterproductive. Do not try. I feel like that's
a kind of yoda. There's a yoda quote there. Don't try, just do.
Oh right, okay. My life has been yoda poor, I'm afraid, but there we are.
Sorry for the introduction there. I was just going to say it actually is quite a good
segue into the next question, which is from Rosalind Murray. So I've just
unmuted you, Rosalind, if you'd like to ask your question live, please go ahead.
Thank you. Yeah, I was just interested in, well, William Blake is great,
but he passed away in 1827. So I'm just kind of wondering if you can speak to
contemporary art ideas and imagination. I mean, there's a whole world in contemporary art
that touches on all the things you're speaking about. It's a huge area at a lot of talks
like this. And many others maybe that come from a literature side, often you're getting conversation
that relates to artists that are very long ago and not about what's going on now. And this is a
huge area which already is exploring what you're talking about. So I'm just all of the things
you're talking about, but kind of gets left out of the conversation. So I'm just wondering,
is there any space within that that influences your work, but from a much more contemporary
perspective? Who is that aimed at both of us? Yeah, that would be great.
You're still there. I would also love to hear the artists. I feel like there are some artists
that perhaps you're holding dear to imagination, if there's any that you'd like to name before we
speak about our own. I wouldn't because there's so many artists from so many cultures that if I
started to even dig into specific artists, specific approaches, and even that brings me back to this
question, another aspect of the question, which tonight and often this idea of we, like there is
no one single we, we is a conglomerate. So I'm kind of interested in the positioning of us,
we, because we are not. And so even when we say we as a group of people
act in this way with imagination, that's not true, because there's a whole group of people
who are maybe artists or naturally creative or have invested a huge amount of time
in a particular practice of art and art understanding and learning creativity and imagination,
you know, developing that, that are not operating in that way. And then there are people in other
cultures that don't operate in that way. So I think I wouldn't like to pick specific people
because there's so much rising and so many people. I'd just be interested in if you had anything from
a more contemporary place that you were coming with yourselves. So however, you don't want to
answer the question, but you're asking us to answer it. That's absolutely fine. And the reason
that Blake came up, I think it's fair. I don't think that's fair. No, no, I'm not. That's not a
fair response. Okay, because well, it sounds like I'm just asking those contemporary art influence
your thought and practice in this area. Maybe there. That's a better way. The reason the reason that
Blake came up, I think was twofold. One is that he's a he's very unusual in that he writes about
imagination all the time. He not only uses imagination, but he rather unusually writes about
it. Most great poets don't. Wordsworth perhaps was another.
And possibly Coleridge, but it's not very common. I mean, the other is that he is a towering genius.
I mean, he doesn't nobody like him in the history of literature. He's utterly unique and incredibly
important. And the fact that he died in 1827 has no nothing whatever to do with it. If he died in
1827 BC, he would be worth exactly as much as if you were alive now, because as Phoebe says,
there is no time in the realm of true imagination. These are timeless words, timeless truth. But if
you ask me to say, what poets do I like? What painters do I like? And so on. I can say that.
I mean, one of the things that often happens when I'm giving a talk is that I have a painting behind
me by Ross Love Day, which I think is a perfect expression of the modern imagination and that
it is a kind of absolutely non-pindownable landscape. And it's also a fantastic abstract
that seems to mean something beyond whatever landscape is being hinted at. So that would be
an example of modern work, which is deeply imaginative. And it's not trying to give me a message.
I mean, it's death to a work of art when it's got a message. And there's a little plot beside
what the artist was trying to do with, you know, or what the composer really meant.
Well, no, great art speaks to itself and is not trying to persuade you of anything. That's what
I'd say. But apologies if I offended the question. I was being a bit frivolous. I mean, you have to
take that as part of the game. Anyway, over to you, Phoebe. So rather than naming specific artists
or musicians, but I might end up doing that. But I think what the question, what it brought up for
me, which I think is a very relevant and interesting one, is the kind of movement ecology around
imagination. You know, who's there? And I speak about something called imagination justice,
which is actually who gets to imagine, you know, where is the imagination capital in the world?
Like, at the moment, it's being hoarded by usually kind of tech CEOs in Silicon Valley who
will look and sound a certain way and also have a lot of money. You know, and there's a thing around
who gets to imagine, which is also not just who gets to imagine, but who's imaginations get to
then translate into, you know, affecting and creating and worlding, you know, this concept of
worlding from, I think, from feminist critical theory is about how some people get, you know,
get to create the world. You know, and as I'm thinking, I'm going to forget who said this,
but it matters who, world's worlds. It's a very famous quote by a writer who does influence me
a lot in imagination. I'm having a blank now. You know, it matters what words, words and world's
worlds. It's not just me. It's staying with the trouble is her book.
Anyway, but something we didn't, sorry, Ian, just to add, something we didn't
go far away. Thank you so much, Madalina. Something we didn't come onto, which I think is really
relevant, is that there is a living, you know, living group of people who, Indigenous people,
whose whole culture, you know, who have been keeping alive a culture of imagination and, you
know, resisting, not all, again, it's very easy to generalizations and labels like not all Indigenous
people, but Indigenous cultures, I think, really deserve a mention here because there is a living
breathing continuum of a way of being in the world and principles, you know, principles, ways of
living relationship to the natural world. So there is a stewarded culture that is keeping
imagination alive in the ways that we've just been talking about, Ian. I'd love to hear, you
know, if you have anything to say about that, because I think it's very relevant to the question.
I'd just say a hundred percent agree. I mean, I resonated with everything you said,
and we're interestingly driving to extinction the little pockets of wisdom that we could be
learning from. And unfortunately, one very great pocket, namely China, has chosen, instead of
offering wisdom that it once had, has chosen to become a delinquent Western state. But I love
what you say about the Indigenous people and the wisdom that is there, and it's very, very important.
Thank you. I'd like to invite Mark, Reid, to ask your question, please. And this might be the last
one, depending on the response time, just because we'd like to end it 40 minutes after, as we've
promised, the 100 minute event. But let's see. Thanks. Thanks very much. Thanks, Phoebe and
Ian McGillicrice. Ian, I love your books. You're an incredible writer. And Phoebe, this is great to
hear about you and the moral imagination. My question is about the moral imagination.
First of all, the first time I heard about moral imagination was in a book by Rudolf Steiner,
who I've talked to Ian about before. It's the philosophy of freedom. And there's
more than imagination, you can see. But anyway, my question is, and we talked about, like you
talked about developing the imagination, you know, do you either of you advocate any spiritual
practices, or do you do any spiritual practice yourself to develop the imagination? And
while I ask that question, because you talk about moral development, Steiner talks about
developing imagination, inspiration and intuition. But he said, in every step in
spiritual development should be three steps in moral development. That's really important.
And I think that's often what happens, that people do develop these, and actually, you know,
this might sound crazy, but something like Trump, who is a big fan of Norman Vincent Peel and the
power of positive thinking, I think has developed a great powers of imagination, believe it or not.
And that is really to power. I like with that, but no moral development whatsoever.
So I'm just curious about yourselves. Do you have spiritual practices to develop imagination?
If it's you Phoebe, go ahead. You're the moral imagination person here.
Yeah. It's interesting. I avoid the word spiritual, usually. I think there's a lot of
baggage. And I also think there's a huge amount of spiritual bypassing that goes on, you know,
the things that use the word spiritual and are incredibly harmful and incredibly
lacking in any kind of sense of the sacred or morality. So I stay away from that word.
I think the work that we're doing in moral imaginations, the work that Ian talked about,
the three pillars of future generations, ancestors, and the more than human world is
profoundly spiritual. Like I think part of why, I mean, I feel incredibly grateful and kind of
honored to do this work every day is because it, I wouldn't call it that, you know, we're going
into local councils, we're working with, you know, large institutions. But what we are trying to do
is create a space and practice that is profoundly connecting to the sacred. When you imagine having
a conversation with a person, seven generations in the future, you know, to touch on Iroquois
indigenous thinking, that is profoundly spiritual and sacred. So to me, this imagination work that
I'm doing, it's not frivolous. It's not about the future. It's not about innovation and technology.
It is deeply sacred and spiritual. And, you know, personally, you know, I meditate, I try and spend
a lot of time in nature. I think meditation, you know, that Rob Bebea is a really interesting
Buddhist teacher who actually works a lot with imagination within the kind of Buddhist practice.
So if anybody is interested, I'd recommend looking at his work. But I think right now,
that I guess I only have so much capacity for spiritual work. And basically, my job is
doing that kind of spiritual work and bringing people together and creating spaces where people
can connect with the, with the imaginal with their sense of what's important, what matters.
And so that's my, that's my answer.
And Ian, do you meditate? I'm just curious.
Yes, I do. At least it's what I call meditation, which is my understanding of mindfulness.
Which I think is an important practice that should be taught in schools,
so that everyone knows how to do this. It's not, it's not like there's some complicated
technique. It's just remembering to stop certain things happening. And as I keep saying,
the first step in creativity sounds negative to the Western mind, because we think in these
polar ways that you must be push, push, push. But sometimes actually you get, if you're pushing
at a dormant pull, then you're doing the wrong thing. And a lot of the time it's about stopping,
stopping doing the things that are going on in my head. And remembering with gratitude the things
that I do love and learn from and feel connected to in my day, in my days. I'm lucky that I live,
well, by choice in a rather remote place where I'm surrounded by nature, which is a constant
companion and reminder. Like Phoebe, I dislike the word spiritual, which can be anything from
having a scented bath with candles to, you know, I just don't, I think the term is terribly
reduced. But on the other hand, people react very badly if you talk about religion for reasons I
completely understand, although in the end I would, I would caution people not to dismiss by any means,
cry, the incredible traditions of the great religions of the world, including Buddhism,
if you call it a religion, which I think a lot of Buddhists do, and quite rightly, because it's
in touch with the divine. So I, what am I saying? I'm saying I don't, I don't, I don't actually
sign up for anything. This is bad, I believe, I don't go to a church, partly because any of the
churches that are within striking distance for me would not be of the kind that I particularly
want to go to. And I would find it very difficult, I think, but I don't approve of that point of
view. I approve of the point of view where you go and you, you form part of a community. So I'm
putting my hands up here as, you know, I'm not, not, not any expert on any of this. I'm just
like, I guess a lot of people listening to this muddling my way through life as best I can,
you know. And when I last checked, I was still alive and that's good.
Thanks. The word spiritual, it's funny, I think I'm trying to reclaim that word because I know
it has a dirty, you know, association, like the religion. And very much I was brought up, you know,
hating religion as a Catholic, because it was very moralistic, in a bad way, in an exterior way,
but yeah, meditation, mindfulness. And that's what I meant, really, you know, I
spoke, yeah. Look, thank you very much for your... Can I loop back around? Just to say that I think
there, you know, I said, I do meditate, but I think just really in parallel to the conversation we
just had about imagination, I think there's something about bringing, you know, to me being alive in
the, you know, the Anthropocene, whether we use that word or not, but being alive in this time and
being really awake and sensitive to what is going on is a spiritual, you know, it is spiritual.
Like, I think that's kind of what you ended on, Ian, is like, I'm alive. I'm, you know,
that is a spiritual experience. And going and sitting and closing my eyes and meditating,
I don't actually think of as more spiritual than the kind of constantly waking up, being like,
this is what's happening, who am I? What am I choosing to do? How do I see it as sensitive
to the pain of the world, to what is happening? I'm just saying that we are reaching to 100
minutes. I don't want to upset Jonathan, even though he's not here, by taking us over. But
it's a really good question. It really got me thinking that there's, you know, the answer I gave
first, and then there was a sort of emergency. Yes. And what the hell about the timing? Sorry,
I'm just going to say something. The, you know, the idea that one should push towards a spiritual
goal is also something that requires awareness of its negative side. So, you know, to be extremely
zen, you know, the answer to being spiritual is to not try and be spiritual at all. You know,
however, it's very good putting on my western hat to have a routine of sitting down and perhaps
reading a certain text or being quiet and meditative. There we are.
And somebody put a paradox mindset, but we haven't got time to talk about that, I suppose.
I saw that. I saw many good questions. Ian and Phoebe will send you the questions
so that you have a chance to look at them. And for everyone, thank you so much for being here
and for those of you that were asking questions and who wanted to ask that didn't have the time,
please bring them to the Connection Session next Tuesday. And I also wanted to mention
that in two weeks' time, there's Isabella Granich, who's going to be in conversation with Ian.
She is a researcher and facilitator. She works in, kind of, from a developmental science
background, works with adolescents. We'll have more information about who she is and the
topic of the conversation very shortly. Michael has put it in the chat, so if you want to
register already for that next session. And this will also go in a sort of modified form
on YouTube once we make the edits. So if you want to replay this, you'll be able to do that.
And you'll see that link come out in a few days. But I think just for now, I wanted to really thank
Phoebe and Ian for taking the time to speak together. I personally found it incredibly
interesting to listen to the two of you in conversation. So thank you very much and good
evening and good afternoon to everyone. Thank you. Thank you.